---
layout: post
title: "Fun and freedom"
author: "CBS Science Club"
permalink: /funandfreedom
---


# Fun and Freedom

## Knots

There’s an event that happens in some colleges where the new students are asked to come on stage one by one, the lights are off, and a projector light is shown on them. Then they are asked some questions such as who is their favourite porn actress. Meanwhile, it doesn’t matter what is the response, pieces of chalk are thrown over the one who is at the stage, and people from older batches in the audience abuse them. Since lights are turned off and there's a projector light in front of the person on the stage, the person can’t see who’s doing what. The environment is very loud, and the audience is “having fun”. Apparently, all of this is being done to comfort people and introduce them to other students from older batches. An organiser of such an event could say after the event:

“I just wanted to say that the concept of this event is not to make fun out of other people's misery. It kinda breaks the ice between us and the seniors where both juniors and seniors meet each other without filters of sophistication. But of course nothing is perfect. But still things do work out.”

Sounds so genuine of an initiative! I feel more events are required that break the ice between people from different sections of any society. What, if at all, could go wrong? I just have a small question: what is the point of the event? I’m asking this question not because I am claiming the answer is “There’s no point”. Because many people could say that they had a lot of fun at the event. Neither am I quickly going to buy the notion that the event is meant to break any ice, because people in the audience who ‘enjoy’ the most actually don’t end up talking at all to many of the people in the newer batch for the rest of their stay in college to know how they’re feeling at the place. So, I actually want to know what all are the points of this event and what’s the fun part here. I just see a lack of harmony between what the event is being presented as versus what ends up happening in the room and what it causes to the mental state of people.

There are many people involved here. There are the organisers, which is a batch of people usually ‘given’ the responsibility of organising such an event. Many of these people have accepted the notion of a ‘batch’ and they agree to follow orders or remain neutral to what’s happening because that seems part of the order that exists. Or consider it as something minor which will get over soon (somewhat like an assignment for a two-credit course). Then there are the hidden organisers, who plan the event internally according to how they want, for their own pleasure as well as for those in senior batches who have asked them to organise it. This group is the actual organiser, and not the whole ‘batch’ as portrayed. They try to put some notions out there so that anyone concerned never introspects about it and doesn't protest (by asking questions such as “will chalk pieces be used this time?”, to which the answer is “of course not”). Doesn’t matter if some concerned students remove the chalk from the room beforehand, these people arrange for it themselves so that they can throw it over the newer students.

Among the people coming on stage, there are a few who are enjoying that this is being done to them, and there are others who are enjoying that this is being done to others. Some have already started planning for next year. There are many who aren’t liking what they or others are being subjected to (some of which are deeply troubled). It can actually take some time and introspection to find what exactly is wrong here, and so most of such people would be in the senior batches who won’t attend it. How does the event end? All seniors go out except a couple of hidden organisers. The lights are turned on and they “apologise” if someone didn’t like what happened. Some people from the administration would have agreed to give room and other permissions for it [^1].

Why would the hidden organisers do something like that? Maybe there’s a fear of losing their position in the society or there’s an excitement for possessing a slave for some time. But mostly a confusion about fun. One can get confused why can’t the other person like or dislike what we like or dislike, despite all the evidence of us having enjoyed it and having termed the activity ‘enjoyable’. A slightly tangential question: is everything going right in our personal lives, so much so that we can try to take away others’ freedom? In fact, do we try to snach something precisely when something’s not right in our own lives?

Doing something for instant gratification is like bargaining time and resources for pleasure. One says in their mind that this thing that is going to give the pleasure is taking only somewhat more time and resources and attention and risk from their side, and the pleasure that will be obtained will more than compensate the ‘expenditure’. At the moment just after the thing that was supposed to give pleasure gets over, one realises that their problems have come back like a boomerang [^2], and that they are very bound by not only external circumstances but also their own choices. The momentary comfort hasn’t lasted, hasn’t wiped any problems, and has only increased the feeling of captivity. The mental barrier for doing something that is challenging is too high, and it isn’t clear why something of that sort should be done. Isn’t more comfort required to cure the problem of post-comfort uneasiness?

## Tightening

“There were just two students in a class today out of a total of 15. These are all students who said they wanted ths subject when they were in first year. Most of them, I believe, would also be getting fellowships. There's continuous support in terms of living at the campus (accommodation etc). I saw around 10 people from this class just yesterday, they looked healthy. Have any students tried to do something about it? Talked to the professor or the HoD or the Dean, or even discussed among each other to come up with some solution? Personally speaking, when I've earlier asked people to do something, they've often told me how busy they are. And then they wake up late at night doing things that have nothing to do with the things they told me they're busy with.”
“But what’s the problem exactly? People not attending classes? Or people not bringing it up to the authorities?”
“People not finding skipping classes a problem worth addressing, despite so many others in the system trying to make sure that students learn things from these classes.”

In colleges, people can try to force newer students to accept them as their ‘mentors’, where all they really want is to command them for their own comfort as long as their alibi lasts. Sometimes some students portray as if they are only acting to misbehave with newer students so that they can be prepared to face the real world. These are often the same people who have never seen the real world themselves - will come late to classes, not attend them attentively, will waste tax-payer’s money to whatever extent possible, understand ‘fun’ as whatever the society has told them, be lonely and fearful at an individual level [^3], will cheat in exams, and try to ‘get’ to places through lies. What will all this haste and fear lead them to [^4]? Doing things without thought and calling it as “living in the moment” is nothing but fooling ourselves. Who are we to give or restrict freedom to anyone? Thinking through it will take time and effort, and commanding others seems like a promise for instant gratification. But the uneasiness builds up inside.

Why are men often so desperate? They seem to be anxious to realise particular trajectories that they have imagined in their mind regarding women. This behaviour comes out of unrealistic, and to be honest unfunny expectations and trajectories the society has put in them. That’s why repeatedly asking cliched things like *‘khana khaya?’* (literally meaning “Had food?”) can be so irritating to the one being asked who’s more interested in reality. And it is just a waste of time for the person asking too. They aren’t asking this out of empathy to the other person, otherwise they would be asking the same question to many others. They are asking because this is all the notion of ‘love’ they have in their minds [^5].

Once upon a time there was a person who did things to make people believe that having sex with him is the most intelligent, new and fun thing to do. He made them believe that it would make them more comfortable with this person and others like him. Indeed, people were promised that this is the way to become truly accepted in the real world and know its secrets. This is what he said while portraying himself as a mentor:

“I just wanted to say that the concept of this activity is not to make fun out of your misery. It will kinda break the ice between the two of us, where both of us meet each other without filters of sophistication. But of course nothing is perfect. But still things do work out.”

To someone new, how assuring can this sound! Plus, now that the ice would be broken, the possibilities should be endless! Imagine what all these people can do together in the coming years. If this person counts the pros, they seem to easily outnumber the minor cons. For example, if the person being manipulated wasn’t asked for their enthusiastic consent about any particular act the assaulter ended up doing, probably he would term everything of that sort as a minor cons and get done with it later with an ‘apology’.

But we hear all the time that assaulting is a crime. Why exactly? What’s wrong with sexual assault, if it has so many ‘benefits’ for the assaulter as we have seen just now? Do *you* really consider it to be a crime? If you do, many other things you would enlist as ‘not crime’ may fall under the same category. Let us question the norm that it is a crime. Let us question even the typical answers like “Oh it is bad because there’s no consent”. This is because if it is a crime for us due to a norm (aka because it is recognized so in the intellectual social circles), and not because we have independently given it a thought and have come to that conclusion, the norms surrounding the previous norm can make us do something stupid when we are placed in a sensitive situation. Because, at the moment when we’ll have the physical and emotional privilege to do something like that, it is then that we may ask yourselves, “What if I manipulate the other person into doing this? It won’t cause at least any short-term problems for me, I have made sure of that in my manipulation. And I don’t think they or I would care about it after some time. I feel I am going to get a lot of pleasure out of this. So why not give it a try?” The reasoning seems logical. And we’d be bringing out this logic at the instance when we have to decide quickly and subconsciously how to go ahead with our behaviour with the other person. All these factors lead to a certain type of haste, that increases the chances of loss of control over self.

Although logical, the above reasoning is incomplete. Logic is built out of assumptions and known experiences. But what about the unknowns? What about questioning the assumptions? What about our own actual needs (and not just desires planted by social norms)? All of this discussion will become quite pointless at the moment when we’re in that situation, and that is why discussing it now, when we’re in comparatively more control of ourselves, is important. This is one of the ways in which, I think, education affects individuals. To ask questions and analyse them when we’re sane so that we can make better choices and decisions when we are placed out of our usual environment.

So let us just ask the question: Why would *you* like to force someone to do something? Here it’s not ‘someone’ forcing ‘someone else’. It’s the possibility of ‘you’ forcing ‘someone you can and would like to manipulate into doing what you want’. Or, why would you like to be indifferent to something happening around you? If you’ve freely asked it and are willing to analyse it, that’s all there is to this article. Only to encourage us to ask something freely, and then analyse it freely, and then interpret the results freely, and then do something really fun. And break ourselves free from all the norms that are crushing our freedom (and worse, giving us the illusion of being free). This is required in all scenarios, even when we would really like to help someone and not just pretend to be a mentor. But what *is* freedom after all? This is another question we can ask. Would you like to?

## Threads

It seems as if everywhere people are making us choose what they want without letting us feel so. What does a CR really do? Seniors intimidating newer students to disable their free speech is so similar to what bad teachers also do to their students. People also act all the time! Got a PhD offer, or the next job is set, or the next project is set. And still there’s emptiness! Still searching for entertainment so that it can do the patchwork. Still being uneasy that they again have to present what isn’t true, or what they haven’t liked, or what they haven’t done. There’s no end to jealousy and comparison [^6], and the uneasiness shows up at times. But if we are not aware of the details, and see what is just being portrayed (either in mess conversations or in insta profiles), we will miss that such individuals are acting! Their attitude towards things is biting them. They aren’t free, and aren't having fun for a large part.

If there’s a bottle of alcohol and a book from the Landau-Lifshitz series kept on a table, why is it that we see more people ‘trying’ the former than the latter? It’s because the choice is subjective but not free; it is biased by social norms in ways we find difficult to recognize. There are many times when all of us have freedom to choose how to spend our time and resources. But what do we do with the freedom once we have it? Does freedom only mean a chance for laziness, or to force someone to do something for us because we want a desired outcome? Freedom is when we stop fearing about something and take it in our hands like a kid takes their toys. And then play around! Often people won’t portray the stuff we’d like to play with as fun. After all, is there any fun in being the dean of an institute when all you have to constantly do is arrange classes and solve the many-body problem of keeping teachers and students happy? Or is it fun just because the job is respectable? What do the deans say about their job [^7]?

The stances are not right or wrong in general, I think. Not introspecting enough and hastily taking a decision is the problem. Being sensitive is a prerequisite. Good teachers don’t teach well because they are supposed to teach well. They are only supposed to teach. It is their personal time and effort and love towards students that goes into their classes that makes them teach well. And then many students don’t show up to these classes saying that they overslept. After many such repeated incidents, a professor once said in the class, “If this is the sense of responsibility students have, what kind of citizens will they become?” Such students, I think, aren’t being actively irresponsible or dishonest. They just don’t spend enough time to introspect where does their fun lie, and that leaves them inevitably unprepared for any new circumstances. But that’s practically the story of all of us! So where does our fun lie?

How exactly is writing an email or studying quantum mechanics or smoking weed interesting? Or rather, why is watching a film interesting for many but making a film interesting only for a few? Classes don’t promise pleasure, weed does. So if someone says they’re breaking the social norms by not going to the 9 AM class by smoking weed till 4 AM, and that they find it interesting, they’re ignoring what the two alternatives are promising them. Weed is promising pleasure, and someone who has experienced it will also ascertain. But what is not talked about is the misery associated with it, which is so widespread among addicted users. Classes don’t promise pleasure because they are often an unsaid pact between students and teachers for discovering things together. People who have experienced it will say that they weren’t promised any pleasure before that class, and that they just persevered till suddenly a moment of awesomeness appeared out of the discussion [^8]. Such students will not talk about it very frequently, not just because the rest are often unwilling to listen but also because of the discriminatory environment. So, things are being advertised differently to us!

I actually want us to be free and do fun things. But these words are used in many cliched contexts. So better, let us first ask some questions that we’d like to know the answer for. Here are some prompts: For prospective students who are yet to join a particular college, they may ask what are the advantages over choosing any other institute? Existing students can ask why is the WiFi speed slow? Someone relatively new at the college can ask how important are marks in one’s life, especially when they're seeing that CGPA is having so much effect on whether they can take the subject of their choice? People say the heaviness steadily increases till the MSc project and they’ll finally be free in the last sem. How true is this? Many people talk about doing summer projects. What is a project? Shall they do one this summer? People say feedback forms aren’t very helpful, what to do about them? How to do actual experiments in the lab courses and not just measurements? Is there a hierarchy in the intellect of students in different streams? How much guidance can/should we provide to newer students? What does ‘interaction with seniors’ mean?

Why is teacher ‘X’ and the like teaching us, even though everyone knows they teach badly? Now that they’re here, what do I do? Why are there no gender/disability sensitisation programmes happening here? Why is everything so deadline oriented at this place? What are deadlines worth? I feel neglected by my friends/family/student community at this place. I need help. And any talk about positive psychology happening around is not worth, since it feels like everyone wants to tell things to me rather than listening. I need TIME! There are just so many assignments and other things. And in that I can hardly spend any time on things like finding my interest. Why does this place suck the fun out of people?

If there are a bunch of people doing something together, questions can be asked in that regard. I am not receiving enough guidance about my roles in the group. What should I do? I am unable to make a balance between my assignments/coursework and the group work. Why is so much time and attention being given to mails and posters? I feel like there’s groupism inside the group that needs to be addressed. Is there democracy in the group? Some members themselves seem to be following social norms all the time, whereas the group as a whole is supposedly meant to break those norms. How to address that?

At the back of our minds we need to remember that *none* of the questions listed so far are the end of any discussion. They are just a starting point, we can take one of them ahead if we are interested. Let us not use these questions as accusations or blaming someone by answering them with something simple. Rather, let us consider them as possible real world problems. It may turn out that not only the question is much more complex, but also *we* can discover a solution to it! Maybe not all-inclusive of a solution, maybe just a special case. But we can still convert *nothing* into *something* [^9]!

To just give an example, let us expand on one such question. Why is there so much rush and tension for the exams? This is again a genuine question, I do not presume a simplistic answer like “marks are/aren’t worth it”, and I am willing to know more from you once you have asked this question to yourselves [^10]. To explain what makes me even ask such a question, here’s some reasoning. I've seen people staying up all night for an exam on the next day. It doesn't seem like they're doing it because of some kind of love towards the subject, it seems to be arising more out of fear. There are just too many things that determine our CGPA, most of which are quite arbitrary (see the previous blog for examples). Then why is there so much rush to score higher, so much so that one gives mental or physical strain to the body without really asking oneself if that is what they'd like to do? Does it lead to better job perspectives? Doesn't seem like it. There have been numerous PhD supervisors, for example, who don't even ask for transcripts, or assign a low weightage to them in their selection process. There have been people who, for five years, pulled all-nighters before exams to get good marks, but didn’t look back at the subject ever again. In the process they lost all their interest and left the subject. I'm not asking what are marks worth to the world. I'm only asking what are marks worth to *you*?

## Thinking of loosening

Are we like those who have seen the sketch of a mango but have never tasted it? If the questions that affect us personally are not asked, or their answers are just assumed without analysing, it leads to a kind of conformity in life, which is synonymous with mundane. Then some new and more extreme material is required to pass time, to ‘enjoy’. After a while these things can grab us in a way that we may find it very difficult to see how bound we are. A porn addict can say it’s their free choice to do what they do. But is it? The question is not whether watching porn is right, it’s whether we’re interested to find if it’s right for us. If we think we already know the answer, we already have all the evidence supporting our hypothesis, why would we question it? Goes for how to address sexual assault, goes for why plastic bottles should or shouldn’t remain in the market, goes for why a molecule vibrates even when it is in its ground state. For any independent pursuit, observation is essential! Observations that can start inner conflicts, inner troubles, a sense of restlessness. What will that lead to? Well, how do I know? It’s the unchartered territory, where you’d have *independently* chosen to go. You own it!

Not questioning, indifference and denial leads to thoughtless and endless accusation. Whoever starts a discussion, gets accused of living in an ideal world. No one is denying the fun! But what is fun after all? And even if we find it difficult to pinpoint what is, it can be relatively easier to see what isn’t. Attaching a line of hope (like “we are trying to make things better”) with actions done with malicious intent don’t justify them. Certainly perseverance is one of things that is required to do something fun, but we can’t sell every other thing saying that we’re trying to persevere. May it be manipulating people to attend events like intro night, forcing them to ‘volunteer’ for some event, or something else of that sort. Once that kind of fun is over, one may not even care to look back at what they’ve destroyed both in the outer world and within themselves. But all one can feel is an emptiness and an expectation that things should’ve been better for them. And looking for another opportunity to pounce on something to misuse it, to run away from all the chances of following one’s genuine interest. One can lie and intimidate while feeling fearful and unaccepted all the time.

One can be fine with lines like “One should follow one’s interest”, but it’s more challenging to confront ourselves that we didn’t really get involved with a particular course or project we did. It’s more tempting to dub it as uninteresting than to analyse it and rather *make* things interesting for us. Doing something like that is different from acting out of anger, in the sense that even there we are out of our regular environment and the actions we are about to do may seem right and spontaneous, but by a second, calm thought we can be surprised by the extent we are thriving certainty of our beliefs in our minds. One can question only when one has observed things, is troubled enough, but wishes to understand things rather than just accusing everyone. If someone chooses to work towards one’s own interests found in this manner, it can actually lead to revolutionary outputs. But that requires our willingness to experience reality that we’ve never known existed.

We can either tighten the knots, or loosen them. Tightening is easier, requires lesser concentration, gives the instant gratification that the knot looks smaller. It is easier and tempting to intimidate a newer person (especially as part of a fake group), and can be counted as tightening a knot in our mind. Loosening it is much more difficult, and has only a narrow chance of getting the reward of being able to open it. Most of the time it’s just a struggle between us and the knot. Which knots are worth our attention? I think the ones that affect us personally and very deeply. But what affects us personally and deeply? Due to our inertia we may also be trying to make sure we do not get truly affected by something by constantly engaging in errands that validate our beliefs [^11]. What will make the mind free from its sacred beliefs that it has held as true?

I think desperate men [^12] have curiosity, ‘ideas’ as well as willingness to take initiatives. But one can still sense their loneliness. What is missing? Acceptance, I think. It’s kind of mad to sing in order to express one’s emotions, and every word uttered asks us to introspect if that is how we want to go ahead. But there is also a kind of acceptance for the song and “its” choices. This, I think, comes close to describing what both fun and freedom are. Feeling like a student. Anyone or anything we wish we had will only take us so far, because that is based on the promises the society and our conditioning has given us. But whether we are with that person or thing or with someone or something else, by genuinely trying to explore the possibilities, by not conforming to social norms, by being open to what it can bring out of us, we might experience being a student. It probably becomes easier to give it a try when we try to observe the alternate behaviour (of feeling like not a student but a master). No effort can guarantee that we’ll get back that feeling of acceptance. Whenever we get it, it’s just a blessing. But if we don’t spend time and effort in making our vessel that can accept and hold some of the blessing, then whenever and whatever we get, we’ll lose it.

From what I’ve found, may it be harassing someone in the name of fun, or reading a theorem, or writing an article, nothing really gives happiness per se. It’s the personal connection and a feeling of genuine play that can. If everything has a soul, the thing we are engaging with also does. And then giving a genuine try to understanding a theorem makes us make connections with a part of existence, because it is challenging to persevere with it while accepting “its” choices at the same time. Whereas giving a genuine thought about harassing someone out of our anger or privilege can help us realise we’re becoming lonelier from within, since there’s no partner to accept or be accepted by. All there is is just a cloud of arguments to justify our beliefs. And since it is just in our mind and nothing outside it, it is bound to become more and more stale. Thoughts and actions seem to be so intricately coupled and yet maintain their distinction. Novel thoughts cannot directly lead to novel actions or vice versa, but they *almost* can.

There are many people who are very good at something for the outsiders but are not genuinely interested in it and are therefore spending time with things the society has promised them as fun. There are others who aren’t so ‘good’ at something according to the society but are genuinely interested, and rather end up spending time with their interest and discovering things. These are people interested to get into a dialogue, like a student. And while engaging in such acts, one can “feel tired but not feel sad about it”. So what to do now? And why? Sometimes it is just evident. It is different from flexing, it is different from seeking validation, and it is different from haste. It’s probably something like play. So shall we start by showing up? Probably. Showing up to what? To a play that can truly break us apart while still accepting us, so much so that the soul can become free. How to find that sort of a thing?

## Our knot

I was talking to a girl a few days ago, who said that she suffers from diabetes and so she started reading about it. She is thinking of doing a project with a teacher who she knows is good, and who works on the same topic. This is an example of what we are interested in helping us understand a part of the world around us. And it doesn’t necessarily have to be a topic that affects us in daily life, it just have to be something that we personally find interesting (and troubling, and willing to independently take the next step for). The other possibility is also there, that someone works on something and we can try to join in their ventures, and later on end up discovering something that we like. And that is also a kind of exploration, to expose oneself to different environments. It has a kind of independence and freedom attached to it. But it is the extent of our *independent* involvement in any of these things that can tell to what extent it is fun for us. To move from wish to action requires one to act - even after tons of “motivation”. Non-action is so lucrative, because we can always get the desired response in our heads. Near-non-action due to social norms is even more lucrative, because it makes it easier for us to hide from our reality as we are getting validated by our surroundings (like submitting an assignment before deadline without truly engaging with it).

I am not going to answer any of the questions mentioned so far, including what you can do about events like intro night at both personal and community levels. That’s because answers make sense only when a question has been asked with some desperation. And if you’re desperate, you should try to find the answer that convinces you. This requires your interest to know the answer, the courage to gather the possibilities, you starting to work on them, and your time (in that order). And that’s exactly what I want you to put on the questions of your choice. The only application I have in mind about all I have written so far is to make you somewhat more interested to find about what truly troubles you (and not what is just a “convenient trouble” for you to pull out as an excuse for inaction whenever someone talks to you). I know that this article might not be enough for that purpose. Are you interested to make it more realistic? Do it! Own it! Make it your project! Bring your thoughts, words and actions into harmony in any particular context. Otherwise you might keep blaming others all the time.

The worst this article can do is to impose the ideology of questioning and learning on you, with any implicit promise that it will be fun to do so. There’s no promise here. My good teachers never tried to forcibly put something down anyone's throat, and their classes were a delight to attend. But many people still didn't come to their class, or didn't actively get involved. The teachers showed concern about those students, but they personally never got mad over it. Although people lost the opportunity to learn from them, what else could those teachers do? They did not try to ‘give’ freedom to students. They rather asked themselves where does their curiosity lie? And then they did that. By doing so, they experienced their freedom, and that ensured students are free to experience their own freedom if they want.

The humility to accept that there can be more to what we are confused or angry or happy about, and there can be more solutions waiting for us to discover, gives us the detachment that a true student has. Once an experience stops, we hear a call from within about what kind it was. If it was something very bad that we feel we did, we feel like running away from it for the time being so that we can forget we were ever involved in any such ‘irresponsible’ act (something that we know in our heart is irresponsible, and is not just socially considered irresponsible). We run away from introspecting. This goes for coming late to class as well as imposing our ideologies on people who come late to class. But when we do something responsibly, we don’t fear from visiting it back. We may still find mistakes, and we realize how we have changed since then, but there isn’t a flood of impulsive emotions to run away from it.

The amount of time spent does not define a relationship, may it be with a person or a topic or a thing. I think a relationship lies in timeless moments. If we bring in the desire that we will have more of those timeless moments if we recreate the setup and spend more time together, we forget that the moments had many more inputs than just time [^13]. Then how to go ahead with longer or larger projects, where we want the support of people over an extended period of time? The detachment probably comes from within, by accepting people with their flaws and flawed choices as a part of existence, and still independently following what we think is the right thing to do. The problem is not whether others will stay with us. The problem is whether we feel like staying with ourselves. The river of time and existence that’s churning others is churning us also. The problem comes when we wish to take other’s decisions on their behalf so that the imagined trajectory in our mind is realised. It’s not the presence or absence of curiosity or ideas that distinguish this state from the state of being in a timeless moment. It’s probably the experience of our own acceptance, the experience of feeling loved.

What if the way to introduce new students to a college is not having an ‘intro night’ with them but rather having genuine conversations, just like friends? One has all the rights to also ask the opposite question also. Or maybe both? But since we live in a society where such events are the norm, they are anyways being implemented. And from what I can observe, these events are doing the opposite of introducing new students to the rest of the students, and are rather prioritizing jingoism and intimidation over free conversations. But feel free to ask both or any question and do your own analysis! Imposition comes when we think that the other thought or action doesn’t deserve to exist. But that does not mean we shouldn’t take sides, that we should support both the existence and non-existence of intro nights. Indeed, the symmetry has to break somewhere.

So, people who think intro nights are the right way not only to introduce new students to college but also for general entertainment of existing students, so be it! And same with people who think they shouldn’t be organised, let them do whatever they're doing to stop this. People should feel free to do whatever they think is right, and let them find out what they actually want to do! But an element of humility helps us to detach ourselves from the rest of the network, and makes us more calm to freely observe and accept the existence of a worse or better being, and ask us to find our place around them. The idea doesn’t change anything or anyone else. It changes our own perspective. It detaches us from things we have held on to, and allows us to independently pursue our genuine curiosities (one at a time) while feeling free and accepted at the same time.

Knowing that the teacher is honest and good, and still not coming to morning class because we smoked weed last night, makes us feel less accepted, in the sense that this often isn’t a new perspective coming from an independent discovery. This is indeed what one would have expected to experience. I’m not saying that it doesn’t give the pleasure that was expected. It certainly does. And for the same amount of pleasure one has to successively get more of that thing (that’s how addiction works) [^14]. But there could be more options and surprises than those promised. Acknowledgement of more is the same as hope. It makes us feel like a child that wants to peak into a crack in the wall, beyond which there’s mystery. Lack of acknowledgement is like putting some paint on the crack. Why does a certain place make people feel isolated? It doesn’t! Because that place is not *one* thing. It is a collection of many things together, only some of which are contributing to making us feel isolated. And many other factors are our own choices. Not asking the questions genuinely, not introspecting enough on it, despite us being troubled, and getting involved into new processes of validation is like putting paint on a crack in our wall, hoping that it will mend it.

How can these ideas affect the mental state of students at any place? Why should anyone be concerned about “acceptance” when there are assignments to do, topics to learn or weed to smoke? That’s right, no one has to be concerned about it. But since we are all bound by actions all the time, we are bound to become genuinely happy or sad also. And that is when a need is felt to find out what is right for us to do, when we are intrigued by the nature of things and people surrounding us. It starts from the problem of understanding and changing the world so that it runs according to our convenience, and it gets converted into introspecting and finding what we we truly enjoy. Since there are no convenient worlds for us now, whatever becomes of the world due to our actions is something new! Sometimes it gives satisfaction to find and do something like that. And then the world can respond in amazing ways, like a blessing.

## A woman

Once upon a time a man met a woman and tried to manipulate her for a week in cliched manners so that they can eventually have sex. She did agree to go with him for dinner. But that evening he tried to advance further without asking for her enthusiastic consent. This woman knew how to put her thoughts into words, something that the man had not seen in his previous encounters with women. She tried telling him a few things, but he was subconsciously not willing to listen to her (although he was acting as if he’s interested to listen, because he didn’t want to let this ‘chance’ go). She realised this quickly. She also knew a magic spell by which the other person becomes just much more calm to listen, but the spell breaks once she stops. She used it, and then he listened to her. This is what she said:

“Realize that whatever you (will) do to me in your current madness, not just in your imagination of sex but also in live conversations, you’re prone to do more harm to yourself. In the world you wish existed, there are just machines that act per your command. But imagine from the perspective of a kid who is in a world where there is no other human. He may start destroying everything around him, but he *will* need others soon, or would need to behave with objects around him as if they are living (thereby not destroying them). This is because doing anything without giving it a thought (including destruction) is boring.

When we use the words ‘destruction’ and ‘creation’, we mean them in two senses. One is that of a physical object, like destroying a building or killing a person, and building a piece of architecture or nurturing a person. This destruction or creation is a result of the physical actions we do. But it is the connection we have with these actions which gives us some meaning, and the actions themselves don’t have a meaning of their own. Despite the general notions of the society, both the use of nuclear weapons as well as behaving with women in a way regarded as socially unacceptable may not concern us. It is our connection with that act that makes it good or bad for us, and that's what matters at the individual level. So you do not need to behave in a certain manner just because I’m telling you to, the idea everyone has about what ‘improvement’ means is different. Do consider yourself the only person whose happiness matters for you, there’s nothing wrong with it. But the second sense of these words is ‘destruction’ or ‘creation’ of our acceptance within the world (including ourselves). When you’re trying to talk not to me but to an imagination of mine you’ve created in your mind, and when those imaginations are your guide for your behaviour with me in real life, will you be able to listen to the genuine curiosities inside you at the moment? Doesn’t it lead to the destruction of your acceptance in the world around you? And will you be able to recognize, let alone accept, what the world has to offer?

Curiosity doesn’t necessarily mean painting or writing, it can be anything that you’d genuinely like to do at the moment, such as just listening to what I’m saying, or saying what you’d actually like to. You’re too busy painting a false portrait of yours in front of me, because in your imagination it leads you to something which will give you happiness. Probably you’re right, in the sense that if and when we’d be engaged in those actions, there can be a lot of possibilities to explore in the play. But would you like to be there alone like a master, just as the kid was in the humanless world? Would you not feel like a slave of what you’d have dragged yourselves into? You are currently unwilling to consider me a fellow human, since you yourself are not a human at the moment. But try recalling something you’ve actually liked experiencing at some point in your life. Were you feeling like a slave or a partner? If being a partner, and having the bond like how a partner has, is all that gives you the enjoyment and comfort you so desperately seek, then how necessary is it for us to be in that particular setting you’ve been imagining in your mind [^15]? How about building a bond here, right now in our conversation?

This is from an interview of Ustad Zakir Hussain I watched, where he says the relationship of a Tabla player with their instrument is not one of master and slave, but rather of friends. The Tabla is a partner that responds, no less than a human partner in an intimate play. Rushing through the topics or steps towards doing something extreme (like being able to play it very fast so that we can show off) doesn’t bring any happiness, because there’s this expectation that we will get happiness from a magical source after showing off; it never happens in reality. The ways your instrument can help you bring that happiness out of yourself are uncountable, yet unknown. If you try becoming its master, then it means you think you already know how you will get happiness from it. And since there’s no unknown now, by the very nature of your interaction you’ll remain empty. So is there really a point in hurrying, in not giving time and space to not only your partner but also yourself?

In such an intimate relationship, whether with a human or an instrument, we may face difficulties while interacting with it. Those are the moments in which we experience being in the absolute present (we forget worrying about the past or future in that instance) and just feel the moment - however good or bad it is. Those are the moments when we feel happiness does *not* lie in being passive. By passive I don’t mean being non-aggressive; the person can be extremely physically violent and passive at the same time. I mean being mentally passive, trying to jump to a conclusion and finish things quickly, being a slave of what others have told, pretending to be a master of things around him, unreasonably believing that something magical will give him happiness in the plot he has imagined. There’s a desire for the mainstream template to be available for everything, and there’s this hope that it would work for him as well. It all follows from not following one’s own genuine curiosity at the moment. What if your genuine curiosity is to actually listen to what I’m saying? What if the plots in your mind are boring in front of what you’re experiencing right now?

You also need to understand how much is in your control and how much is in the partner’s (doesn’t matter if the partner is a woman or an instrument). And then think over how to do that which you can. Notice the vulnerability - the two people (or the person and the object) may be interested in completely different things at other times, they have full liberty to go away from each other, but may still remain together for a few moments. They are in complete togetherness physically, as well as in complete solitude by giving mental time and space to each other. *That* is exploration, something which is not done in (mental) void but rather in the presence of things and people around us, where non-living objects for others can be as much like an alive partner for us. It is a unique, accidental and free union of indulging in something (or with someone) and the renunciation of possessing it. On the other hand, the same vulnerability that is a prerequisite for creating a bond in a genuine relationship and is celebrated there, manifests itself as fear, insecurity and coercion in an exploitory relationship (may it be with a person or anything). Then even a person may become a non-living object for us, whose company is extremely superficial.

In the case of pursuit of genuine curiosity also we may find ourselves introduced to new possible avenues as time passes. But there’s a difference between this kind of exploration and running anxiously on promised paths. There’s no end goal or hurry there, and there’s no idea of mainstream. If you tell me something you wouldn’t actually like to share with me, but are still telling it to me in the hope of something magical (or film-like) unfolding (hoping that then I would start trusting you more), then no wonder you become more restless regardless of whether things go the way you expected. By being just what you actually are, saying what you actually want to, not playing any mental games, you *are* celebrating the vulnerability required to build a genuine relationship.

There are times when it feels as if there’s just no other option than to engage in errands that promise validation, when you don’t feel like engaging yourselves as a student in any particular activity. There are ways out of this too. For a candle to start giving light, another candle is required to light it first. Observe people, beings and things that are alight from within. If someone has good intentions for not just you but everyone, make sure you give yourself enough time to be able to let their light sink in you. They *are* the candles you need, but do not try to command them as if you know everything. Introduce some humility in yourselves, which is the same as keeping your own twig calm in their flame’s vicinity so that it has enough time to start burning. This calmness is illogical, and you have every logical reason to exploit them (like blowing off the candle). But recognize how lonely and needy of genuine company you are, and how much you are unsure about your place in the world. You will get fulfilled only when you love and feel loved. If you’d be considerate and willing to accept yourselves and things and people around you, you *will* find and do things you’re interested in, regardless of circumstances!”

She stopped, and the spell broke. What do you think the man would’ve done after listening to her?

[^1]: So far this is just observation and stating the facts, there’s actually no analysis or interpretation. But often stating the facts is enough to cause a backlash. So be it!

[^2]: For example, people who just accept the notion that alcohol is a social lubricant regret they shouldn’t have spoken what they did when they were drunk.

[^3]: Since friendship requires acceptance and not intimidation.

[^4]: A senior of mine used to call such people ‘Pitaau’.

[^5]: Or worse, to make the other person forcibly believe that they care for them so that they can move ahead on a particular imagined trajectory.

[^6]: Even when one’s own things are ‘sorted’.

[^7]: Pro tip - go ask your dean!!

[^8]: Even in the best courses I have had, they became so only because of the discussion and the doubts asked.

[^9]: And probably choosing one’s scientific problems also requires free initiatives in the [same] (https://youtu.be/cA91PcUVd3M) spirit.

[^10]: And I wouldn’t be so interested to hear from you in this regard before you do some written analysis.

[^11]: For example, going for a movie just so that we can prove ourselves that we are in a relationship.

[^12]: And also women.

[^13]: I really liked learning about a chemical reaction in my first year, but once the interest changed I could never revive it back.

[^14]: The chances that such people accuse others of not having done their jobs properly are much higher.

[^15]: How similar is being a student to being a partner or a friend? Can they be synonymous?
